# Configure and Install RKE2 + Rancher

Ansible playbook to configure RKE2 Cluster with Rancher installed using custom CA root.

***Tests made in Rocky Linux 9***

## Prerequisites
1. 1 or more hosts / vm's - EL's distros (Oracle Linux, SUSE Linux, Red Hat, Alma Linux, Rocky Linux)
1. Public ssh keys configured in hosts
1. Internet Connection
1. Custom CA root configured
1. Custom tls-certificate to be used in https Rancher's URL

## Playbook - Inventory

Use `./inventory/hosts.yml` as a versioned example. For real environments, copy it to `./inventory/hosts.local.yml` or another ignored inventory file and keep host-specific data out of git.

* IP
* Hostname

For a single-node cluster, keep only the `primary_master` host in the `masters` group and omit workers or leave the `workers` group empty.

## Playbook - RKE2

This playbook is divided in 4 roles:

* Init
* Principal
* Masters
* Agents

### Init

Installation of basic configuration in all hosts to rke2 cluster communicate and works in a RHEL, configure firewalld, kernel modules and update packages.

### Principal

Based in group vars, the principal master host is defined and configured as first and principal master node. It will be installed:
* rke2
* rke2-selinux
* kubectl
* git
* helm

### Masters

All secondary master nodes and new added nodes will receive node-token from principal node to be configured as master node in rke2-cluster. In single-node inventories, this play is skipped.

### Agents

All worker nodes and new added nodes will receive node-token from principal node to be configured as worker node in rke2-cluster. In single-node inventories without workers, this play is skipped.


### Starting Up

```
ansible-playbook -i inventory/hosts.local.yml playbook/init-cluster.yml
```

## Playbook - RANCHER

After generating necessary files in certs/tls-rancher folder:

* ca-additional.pem
    * This certificate represents additional trusted CA's | [docs](https://ranchermanager.docs.rancher.com/getting-started/installation-and-upgrade/installation-references/helm-chart-options#additional-trusted-cas)

* internal-ca.pem
    * This certificate is necessary when using a a private CA, Rancher requires a copy of the private CA's root certificate or certificate chain, which the Rancher Agent uses to validate the connection to the server | [docs](https://ranchermanager.docs.rancher.com/getting-started/installation-and-upgrade/resources/add-tls-secrets)


* rancher.local.crt / rancher.local.key
    * TlS crt and key that will be used in https 

```
ansible-playbook -i inventory/hosts.local.yml playbook/install-rancher.yml
```

## GitOps - Downstream Clusters

The `gitops/` directory contains declarative examples for Rancher downstream
clusters of type custom/imported.

Start with:

```bash
kubectl --kubeconfig rancher.kubeconfig apply -k gitops/rancher/clusters/dev
```

Then apply the registration manifest generated by Rancher to the downstream
cluster. See `gitops/README.md` for the complete flow and Argo CD/Fleet
examples.

For custom clusters on empty VMs, apply
`gitops/rancher/custom-clusters/dev` first, then run:

```bash
ansible-playbook -i inventory/custom-downstream.local.yml playbook/register-custom-downstream.yml
```
